Paper: geosnap: The Geospatial Neighborhood Analysis Package (#931)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/eli_knaap/main.md

---
# Ensure that this title is the same as the one in `myst.yml`
title: "geosnap: The Geospatial Neighborhood Analysis Package"
subtitle: Open Tools for Urban, Regional, and Neighborhood Science
abstract: |
  Understanding neighborhood context is critical for social science research, public
  policy analysis, and urban planning. The social meaning, formal definition, and formal
  operationalization of "neighborhood" depends on the study or application, however, so
  neighborhood analysis and modeling requires both flexibility and adherence to a formal
  pipeline. Maintaining that balance is challenging for a variety of reasons. To address

>   those challenges, `geosnap`, the Geospatial Neighborhood Analysis Pacakge provides a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  those challenges, `geosnap`, the Geospatial Neighborhood Analysis Package provides a
```

  suite of tools for exploring, modeling, and visualizing the social context and spatial
  extent of neighborhoods and regions over time. It brings together state-of-the-art
  techniques from geodemographics, regionalization, spatial data science, and
  segregation analysis to support social science research, public policy analysis, and
  urban planning. It provides a simple interface tailored to formal analysis of
  spatiotemporal urban data.

---

## Introduction

Quantitative research focusing on cities, neighborhoods, and regions is in high demand.
On the practical side, city planners, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), and
commercial businesses all have increasing access to georeferenced datasets and spatial
analyses can turn these data into more efficient, equitable, and profitable,
decision-making [@cortes2020OpensourceFramework; @finio2022SmartGrowth; @Kang2021;
@Knaap2017; @knaap2023SegregatedDesign; @Rey2022a; @wei2022ReducingRacial]. On the

> scientific/academic side, many of the era's pressing problems are spatial and or urban

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scientific/academic side, many of the era's pressing problems are spatial and/or urban
```

Reviewer 2: and or -> or

> scientific/academic side, many of the era's pressing problems are spatial and or urban

Reviewer 2: "many of the era's pressing problems" -> examples?

in form, thus requiring bespoke statistical methods and simulation techniques to produce

> accurate inferences. Thus, while data science teams in industries across the planet race

Reviewer 2: "conquer 'geospatial data science' " -> perhaps you can be more specific what "conquer" means here

to conquer 'geospatial data science' few practitioners have expertise in the appropriate
data sources, modeling frameworks, or data management techniques necessary for wrangling
and synthesizing urban data.

> To address these challenges we introduce `geosnap`, the geospatial neighborhood analysis

Reviewer 2: Is your package the first ever geospatial neighborhood analysis package or was there an existing package? If yes, how is yours different from that?

Author: as far as we know it's the first

package, which is a unique Python package sitting at the intersection of spatial science
and practical application. In doing so, it provides a bridge between formal spatial
analysis/spatial econometrics and the applied fields of neighborhood change, access to

> opportunity, and the social determinants of health. The package provides extremely fast

Reviewer 2: I suggest considering providing specific measurable benefits instead of using words such as "extremely" or "hundreds"

Author: this is difficult because these metrics are hard to judge for spatial data. a relatively 'small' n of 200k can still have an enormous "size" because each record needs to store the vertices of each geometry (which depends on the kind of geometry and resolution, etc). Also we're talking about  downloads here, which are obviously dependent on external servers and the size of a given request. I tried to add some additional context

and efficient access to hundreds of socioeconomic, infrastructure, and environmental

> quality indicators that allow researchers to move from zero data to an informative model

Reviewer 2: How is it possible to have an informative model if I have zero data?

Author: the user has zero data when they begin using the package; the package provides all data, thus everything necessary to move from zero to an informative model

in a few short lines of code. 

It is organized into layers for data acquisition, analysis, and visualization, and 
includes tools for harmonizing disparate datasets into consistent geographic boundaries,
creating "geodemographic typologies" that summarize and predict multidimensional
segregation over time, and network analysis tools that generate rapid (locally
computed) service areas and travel isochrones. We expect the tool will be immediately
useful for any analyst studying urban areas.

## The Geospatial Neighborhood Analysis Package (geosnap)

`geosnap` provides a suite of tools for exploring, modeling, and visualizing the social
context and spatial extent of neighborhoods and regions over time. It brings together
state-of-the-art techniques from geodemographics, regionalization, spatial data science,
and segregation measurement to support social science research, public policy analysis, and
urban planning. It provides a simple interface tailored to formal analysis of
spatiotemporal urban data, and its primary features include

- Quick access to a large database of commonly-used neighborhood indicators from U.S.

>   providers including Census, EPA, LEHD, NCES, and NLCD, streamed efficiently from the

Reviewer: Need to spell out these acronyms -  EPA, LEHD, NCES, and NLCD

- Bespoke visualization methods for understanding travel commute-sheds, business
  service-areas, and neighborhood change over time

The package is organized into four layers providing different aspects of functionality,
namely `io` for data ingestion and storage, `analyze` for analysis and modeling
functions, `harmonize` for geographic boundary harmonization , and `viz` for
visualization.

```python
import geopandas as gpd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import pandas as pd
from geosnap import DataStore
from geosnap import analyze as gaz
from geosnap import io as gio
from geosnap import visualize as gvz
from geosnap.harmonize import harmonize
```

### Data

Neighborhoods, cities, and regions are characterized by a variety of data, and to
understand how places change over time, or how they affect the people who live there,
researchers often require information on the social, environmental, institutional, and
economic conditions that characterize the area. The geosnap package tries to make the
process of collecting and wrangling these various publicly-available datasets simpler,
faster, and more reproducible by repackaging the most commonly used into modern formats

> and serving (those we are allowed to) over fast web protocols. This makes it much faster

Reviewer 2: much faster than what?

Author: added simple comparison to FTP download and read-in with geopackage

to conduct, iterate, and share analyses for better urban research and public policy. Of
course, these datasets are generally just a starting place, designed to be used
alongside additional information unique to each study region.

Toward that end, many of the datasets used in social science and public policy research
in the U.S. are drawn from the same set of resources, like the Census, the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), or the National Center
for Education Statistics (NCES), to name a few. As researchers, we found ourselves
writing the same code to download [versions of] the same data repeatedly (at different
scales or time frames). That works ok in some cases, but it is also cumbersome, and can

> be extremely slow for even medium-sized datasets. While there are nice tools like

Reviewer 2: Can you show the comparison in terms of performance between the existing and the proposed?

Author: added a simple example

[cenpy](https://github.com/cenpy-devs/cenpy) or
[pyrgris](https://walker-data.com/pygris/), these tools cannot overcome a basic
limitation of many government data providers, namely that they use old technology, e.g.,
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) and outdated file formats (like shapefiles).

Thus, rather than repetitively querying these slow servers, geosnap takes the position
that it is preferable to store repeatedly-used datasets in
[highly-performant formats](https://github.com/opengeospatial/geoparquet), because they
are usually small and fast enough to store on disk. When not on disk, it makes sense to

> stream these datasets over [S3]((https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)), where they can be read

Reviewer 3: Removing these extra parentheses should resolve your last failing check.

```suggestion
stream these datasets over [S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), where they can be read
```

The other DOI issues Rowan mentioned have been resolved.

Author: oops. thanks!

the globe, but these datasets are used so commonly in U.S.-centric research that
geosnap's developers maintain this database as an additional layer.

```python
datasets = DataStore()
```

#### Demographics

Over the last decade, one of the most useful resources for understanding socioeconomic
changes in U.S. neighborhoods over time has been the
[Longitudinal Tract Database (LTDB)](https://s4.ad.brown.edu/Projects/Diversity/researcher/bridging.htm),
which is used in countless studies of neighborhood change [@Logan_2014]. One of the most
recognized benefits of this dataset is that it standardizes boundaries for census
geographic units over time, providing a consistent set of units for time-series
analysis. An under-appreciated benefit of these data is the ease with which researchers
have access to hundreds of useful intermediate variables computed from raw Census data
(e.g. population rates by race and age). Unfortunately, the LTDB data is only available
for a subset of Census releases (and only at the tract level), so geosnap includes
tooling that computes the same variable set as LTDB, and it provides access to those

> data for every release of the 5-year ACS at both the tract and blockgroup levels

Reviewer: Pls add full form of ACS

Reviewer 4: Was this resolved?

(variable permitting). Note: following the Census convention, the 5-year releases are
labelled by the terminal year.

Unlike LTDB or The National Historical Geographic Information System
[NHGIS](https://www.nhgis.org/), these datasets are created using code that collects raw
data from the Census FTP servers, computes intermediate variables according to the
codebook, and saves the original geometries-- and is
**[fully open and reproducible](https://github.com/oturns/geosnap/blob/main/tools/process_census_gdb.ipynb)**.
This means that all assumptions are exposed, and the full data processing pipeline is
visible to any user or contributor to review, update, or send corrections. Geosnap's
approach to data provenance reflects our view that open and transparent analysis is
always preferable to black boxes, and is a much better way to promote scientific
discovery. Further, by formalizing the pipeline using code, the tooling is re-run to
generate new datasets each time ACS or decennial Census data is released.

> To load a dataset, like the 2010 tract-level census data, just call it as a method,

Reviewer 2: What's special about "2010 tract-level census data"?

Author: nothing, it's just an example

which returns a geodataframe (some datasets, like blocks or `acs` have additional
arguments). Geometries are available for all of the commonly used administrative units,
many of which have multiple time periods available:

- metropolitan statistical areas (MSAS)
- states
- counties
- tracts
- blockgroups
- blocks

There is also a table that maps counties to their constituent MSAs. Note that

> blockgroups are not exposed directly, but are accessible as part of the ACS and EJSCREEN

Reviewer: pls add full form of EJSCREEN

Reviewer 4: Reopening. I know the definition is below, but please move it up here or save this comment for after its definition.

otherwise it will be streamed from S3 (provided an internet connection is available).
The geosnap `io` module (aliased here as `gio`) has a set of functions for creating
datasets for different geographic regions and different time scales, as well as
functions that store remote datasets to disk for repeated use.

#### Environment

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)'s
[envrironmental justice screening tool (EJSCREEN)](https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen) is a
national dataset that provides a wealth of environmental (and some demographic) data at
a blockgroup level. For a
[full list of indicators](https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen/overview-environmental-indicators-ejscreen)
and their metadata, see the EPA page, but this dataset includes important variables like
air toxics cancer risk, ozone concentration in the air, particulate matter, and proximity
to superfund sites.

#### Education

Geosnap provides access to two related educational data sources. The National Center for
Education Statistics
[(NCES)](https://nces.ed.gov/programs/edge/Geographic/DistrictBoundaries) provides
geographic data for schools, school districts and (some time periods) of school
attendance boundaries. The

> [Stanford Education Data Archive](https://exhibits.stanford.edu/data/catalog/db586ns4974)

Reviewer: Pls add SEDA acronym here as its being used later.

is a collection of standardized achievement data, available at multiple levels (from
state to district to school) with nearly complete national coverage. These data were
released by researchers at Stanford to "help us—scholars, policymakers, educators,
parents—learn how to improve educational opportunity for all children," and are an
incredible resource for social science research.For more information on how to use the
SEDA data, see their website, or the
[Educational Opportunity Project](https://edopportunity.org/). These can be combined
quickly to visualize or conduct further spatial analyses of educational achievement at
multiple geographic scales.

#### Employment

> The LODES data contain job counts tabulated for home and workplace census block, and

Reviewer: Full form of LODES is missing

broken down by industrial sector, and a handful of demographic characteristics like race
and education. LODES also provides flow matrices that show the origin and destination
blockgroups, and the number of commuters who travel between the two.

### Harmonization

A common issue in spatial analysis is that geographic tabulation units can (and often
do) change over time. For instance the U.S. census boundary polygons like tracts and
blocks are re-drawn with each census to accomodate population growth and change. That

> means it's impossible to see if tract XZY has changed over time because "tract XYZ"

Reviewer 2: XZY -> XYZ? Are you just making an example of a tract? If that's the case, would it be just enough to call it as "a tract"?

Author: removed xyz

means something different in each time period. To help solve that problem geosnap
leverages the pysal [`tobler`](https://pysal.org/tobler) package to harmonize spatial

> boundaries over time. Doing so is as simple as calling the `harmonize()` function

Reviewer 2: A period is missing.

The simplest way to harmonize boundaries is to use areal interpolation, meaning we use
the area of overlap between consecutive years to create a weighted sum of intersecting
polygons. This approach assumes each polygon has constant density of each attribute so

> its most useful when the polygons are small and homogenous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its most useful when the polygons are small and homogeneous
```

> its most useful when the polygons are small and homogenous

Reviewer 2: Missing period

When harmonizing boundaries over time, we need to distinguish between

> [intensive and extensive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intensive_and_extensive_properties)

Reviewer 2: Please explain what these variables are in a few words in addition to linking them to the wikipedia page.

variables because each needs to be handled differently during the interpolation process.
Median income is a statistic (so intensive), whereas total population is a count

> (extensive), so we make sure to pass each to the appropriate list

Reviewer 2: Missing period

#### Harmonizing to a Common Census Boundary

> ```python

Reviewer 2: You can probably add comments to explain what certain variables mean. Also please provide what this cell block does in a few sentences.

sd_harm20 = harmonize(

>     sd,

Reviewer 2: what's sd?

    intensive_variables=["median_contract_rent", "p_hispanic_persons"],
    extensive_variables=["n_total_pop"],
    weights_method="area",
    target_year=2020,
)
gvz.plot_timeseries(
    sd_harm20,
    "median_contract_rent",
    title="Median Rent, 2010 Boundaries",
    cmap="Greens",
    dpi=200,
    figsize=(12, 10),
    nrows=2,
    ncols=2,
)
plt.tight_layout()

> ```

Reviewer: Consider adding comments to explain purpose of each code block to improve code readability (applicable to all code blocks in the paper).

![Census Data with Harmonized Boundaries](harmonize.png)

> 

Reviewer: Please add caption to above figure(and all the figures in the paper) such as "Figure X: Description of the figure"

instead harmonize all time periods to a consistent geographic unit defined elsewhere
(like a school district, or congressional district, or a regular hexgrid)

```python
from tobler.util import h3fy
sd_hex = h3fy(sd[sd.year == 2010], resolution=7)
sd_hex_interp = harmonize(
    sd, target_gdf=sd_hex, intensive_variables=["median_contract_rent"]
)
gvz.plot_timeseries(
    sd_hex_interp,
    "median_contract_rent",
    title="Median Rent, Regular Hexgrid",
    dpi=200,
    cmap="Greens",
    figsize=(12, 10),
    nrows=2,
    ncols=2,
)
plt.tight_layout()

```

![Census Boundarized Harmonized to a Hexgrid](harmonize_hexgrid.png)

After the harmonization process, each polygon represents a distinct portion of the study
area whose boundaries are unchanging, and can be conceived as a discrete unit in
temporal analyses. That is, unlike the original decennial census data whose polygons are
different in each time period, the harmonized data can be used directly in studies of
neighborhood change, for example those using Markov-based methods [@Agovino2019; @gallo_space-time_2004-1; @kang_rey_2018_ars; @rey_2016_jgs; @Rey2014] or

> sequence-analysis methods [@Kang2020a; @Lee2017] (both of which are built into `geosnap`)

Reviewer 3: I noticed this `Kang2020a` citation does not have a corresponding entry in your bib file, so it does not resolve:

![image](https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/assets/9453731/3766fb24-507a-487b-943d-c683cdf7970a)

Can you add an entry for this?

however given its emphasis on geographic units of analysis (and subsequent mapping of
the results) it is often viewed as a first (if not requisite step) in exploratory
analyses of a particular study area.

The intellectual roots of geodemographics extend from analytical sociology and classic
studies from Factorial Ecology
[@Berry1971; @Hunter1972; @lebowitz1977CriticalExamination; @Perle1979; @Rees1969] and
Social Area Analysis
[@Bell1962; @Brindley1979; @green1971SocialArea; @Shevky1955; @Spielman2008]. Today,
geodemographic analysis is routinely applied in academic studies of neighborhood
segregation and neighborhood change, and used extremely frequently in industry,
particularly marketing where products like
[tapestry](https://www.esri.com/en-us/arcgis/products/data/data-portfolio/tapestry-segmentation)
and
[mosaic](https://www.experian.com/small-business/geodemographic-segmentation-mailing-lists)
are sold for their predictive power. Whereas social scientists often look at the
resulting map of neighborhood types and ask how these patterns came to be, practitioners
often look at the map and ask how they can use the patterns to inform better strategic
decisions.

> In urban social science, a primary goal is often to study the social composition of

Reviewer 2: Examples of "social composition"?

neighborhoods in a region, understand whether they have changed over time (and where)
and whether these neighborhood types are consistent over time and across places. That
requires a common pipeline of collecting the same variable sets, standardizing them
(often within the same time period so they can be pooled with other time periods) then
clustering the entire long-form dataset followed by further analysis and visualization

> of the results. Most often, this process happens repeatedly using diffferent

Reviewer 2: diffferent -> typo

combinations of variables or different algorithms or cluster outputs (and in different
places at different times). Geosnap provides a set of tools to simplify this pipeline
making it trivial to construct, interrogate, and visualize a large swath of models (e.g.
using different subsets of variables) for rapid exploration.

> To create a simple geodemographic typology, use the cluster function and pass a

Reviewer 2: "the cluster function" -> I don't think this was referred before?

geodataframe, a set of columns to include in the cluster analysis, the algorithm to use
and the number of clusters to fit (though some algorithms require different arguments
and/or discover the number of clusters endogenously. By default, this will z-standardize
all the input columns, drop observations with missing values for input columns, realign
the geometries for the input data, and return a geodataframe with the cluster labels as
a new column (named after the clustering algorithm).

```python
atl = gio.get_acs(datasets, msa_fips="12060", years=2021, level="tract")
atl_kmeans, atl_k_model = gaz.cluster(

>     gdf=atl, method="kmeans", n_clusters=5, columns=columns, return_model=True

Reviewer 2: Does your package allow users to evaluate the quality of the clustering result?

Author: yes, we return the model object. clarified in the text

)
```

To understand what the clusters are identifying, another data visualisation technique is

> useful. Here, we rely on the Tufte-ian principle of “small multiples”, and create a set

Reviewer 2: Please elaborate "Tufte-ian"

of violin plots that show how each variable is distributed across each of the clusters.
Each of the inset boxes shows a different variable, with cluster assignments on the
x-axis, and the variable itself on the y-axis The boxplot in the center shows the median

> and inner-quartile range (IQR), and the “body” of the “violin” is a kernel-density

Reviewer 2: IQR is *interquartile* range, not inner

the bulk of the observations are located, and the skinny “necks” show the long tails.

```python
gvz.plot_violins_by_cluster(atl_kmeans, columns, cluster_col="kmeans")
```

![Violin Plots](violins.png)

Regionalization is a simliar exercise that attempts to define groups of homogenous
tracts, but also enforces a contiguity constraint so that similar geographic units must
also be proximate to one another. As with geodemographic clustering, when carrying out a
regionalization exercise, we are searching for groups of observations (census tracts in
this case) which are similar in socioeconomic and demographic composition. If the goal
of geodemographics is to identify neighborhood *types*, that could exist anywhere in the
region, the goal of regionalization is to identify *specific neighborhoods* that exist
at a distinct place in the region.

Following that concept, we can use constrained clustering to develop an empirical
version of geographically-bounded neighborhoods, where the neighborhoods are defined by
internal social homogeneity. This is similar to the historic and well-defined
neighborhood zones in places like Chicago and Pittsburgh.

> ```python

Reviewer 2: Same issue. Please provide a short explanation about what this cells does

la = gio.get_acs(datasets, county_fips="06037", years=2021, level="tract")
la_ward_reg, la_ward_model = gaz.regionalize(
    gdf=la,
    method="ward_spatial",
    n_clusters=25,
    columns=columns,
    return_model=True,
    spatial_weights="queen",
)
la_ward_reg[columns + ["geometry", "ward_spatial"]].explore(
    "ward_spatial", categorical=True, cmap="Accent", tiles="CartoDB Positron"
)
```

![Geodemographic Regions in Los Angeles](la_regions.png)

#### Transitional Dynamics

With geosnap, it’s possible to look at temporal geodemographics without writing much
code. Under the hood, the package provides tools for scaling each dataset within its own
time period, adjusting currency values for inflation, and ensuring that times,
variables, and geometries stay aligned properly. Together those tools make it easy to
explore how different portions of the region transition into different neighborhood
types over time, and if desired, model the evolution of neighborhood change as a spatial
Markov process.

> ```python

Reviewer 2: See the previous comment

chicago_ward = cluster(gdf=chicago, columns=columns, method='ward', n_clusters=5)
plot_timeseries(chicago_ward, 'ward', categorical=True, nrows=2, ncols=2, figsize=(12,16))
plt.tight_layout()
```

![Geodemographic Neighborhood Types in Chicago](transition_maps.png)

In this example, the vast majority of tracts are assigned to the same geodemographic
type in each time period, but some transition into different types over time. The ones
that do transition tend to be those on the edges of large contiguous groups (i.e. change
tends to happen along the periphery and move inward, implying a certain kind of spatial
dynamic). Following, we can also use the sequence of labels to create a spatial Markov
transition model. These models examine how often one neighborhood type transitions into
another type–then how these transition rates change under different conditions of
spatial context.

Here, a key question of interest concerns whether there is spatial patterning in the
observed neighborhood transition. If neighborhood transitions are influenced by what
occurs nearby, then it suggests the potential influence of spatial spillovers. Although

> there is nothing ‘natural’ about it, this phenomenon would be akin to classic

Reviewer 2: double quote

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This phenomenon would be akin to classic
```
I might recommend removing the phrase altogether without any additional context or citation.

sociological models of neighborhood change from the 1920s
[@Park1925; @Park1936; @Park1952]. Further, if there is evidence that space matters for
transitions, then any attempt to understand neighborhood processes in this region
*should also consider the importance of spatial interaction*.

> A natural way to understand the transition matrix between two neighborhood types is the

Reviewer 2: it the plot -> is to plot

plot the observed transition rates as a heatmap. The rows of the matrix define the
origin neighborhoods (i.e. the neighborhood type at ) and the columns define the
“destination” neighborhood type (the neighborhood type at ), for each of the types and
the values of the cells are the fraction of transitions between these two types over all
time periods:

$$

> \hat{p}_{i,j} = \frac{n_{i,j}}{\sum_{k=1}^k n_{i,k} }

Reviewer 2: Do you need this equation? This is just a normalized value. Also, you don't provide what the variables mean

Reviewer 4: Reopening as unresolved. Please reference and elaborate in the text or remove in favor of further figure explanation (unless I'm missing something somewhere!)

$$

```python
from geosnap.visualize import plot_transition_matrix
plot_transition_matrix(chicago_ward, cluster_col='ward')
```

> ![Chicago Neighborhood Transitions](./transition_matrix.png)

Reviewer: This figure says that there are 6 Modal neighbors. However, the previous figure and code was showing 5 clusters. How do you reconcile?

Author: there are 6 axes in the figure: one "global" transition heatmap that shows transition probabilities between all types pooled together. The other five heatmaps show transitions conditional on the modal neighbor. These correspond to each of the 5 possible clusters identified earlier

so the figure is correct

The “Global” heatmap in the upper left shows the overall transition rates between all
pairs of neighborhood clusters, and the successive heatmaps show the transition rates
conditional on different spatial contexts. The “Modal Neighbor 0” graph shows how the
transition rates change when the most common unit surrounding the focal unit is Type 0.
The strong diagonal across all heatmaps describes the likelihood of stability; that is,
for any neighborhood type, the most common transition is remaining in its same type. The
fact that the transition matrices are not the same provides superficial evidence that
conditional transition rates may differ. A formal significance test can be conducted

> using the returned `ModelResults` class (which shows significantly different transition

Reviewer: Where is this ModelResults class? can we provide some explanation.

dynamics in this example).

> Further, the transition rates can be used to simulate future conditions (note this

Reviewer 2: How do you evaluate the simulate results?

Reviewer 5: @knaaptime Hi, could you add some details on how you evaluate simulated results?

Author: Hi, thanks for raising this issue. Evaluating the simulation results is a genuine challenge because the dataset can't be partitioned into train/test like many others can. We can't randomly sample within a cross section (because the spatial weights matrix that defines contiguity between observations, i.e. the local neighborhood, will no longer capture the proper neighbor set). We can't sample from time periods either because it breaks the temporal continuity. 

Thus, the only way (we're aware) to evaluate the simulation results is to truncate the training data by leaving out one or two of the most recent time periods, train a model on the earlier data, and compare the simulated results with the observed data in the most recent time periods, which is the approach they use in  [this paper](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0245357).

the `geosnap` package doesn't provide any specialized functionality for doing the latter (because it only requires the user to fit a model on a smaller subset of data), so we chose not to include any discussion in the paper

feature is still experimental). To simulate labels into the future, we determine the
spatial context for each unit (determined by its local neighborhood via a PySAL Graph)
and draw a new label from the conditional transition matrix implied by the units local
neighborhood. This amounts to a simple cellular automata model on an irregular lattice,
where there is only a single (stochastic) transition rule, whose transition
probabilities update each round. 

![Simulated Neighborhood Types in Chicago](chicago_predictions.gif)

> #### Travel Isochrones

Reviewer 2: Can you add a short explanation of what Isochrones means?

Author: added short explanation

> As a package focused on "neighborhoods", much of the functionality in geosnap is

Reviewer 2: What's the reason behind double quoting? Is this different from the neighborhoods you referred to previous? if yes, then why and how?

Author: i tend to use double and single interchangeably

> organized around the concept of 'endogenous' neighborhoods. That is, it takes a

Reviewer 2: double quote

---
# Ensure that this title is the same as the one in `myst.yml`
title: "geosnap: The Geospatial Neighborhood Analysis Package"
subtitle: Open Tools for Urban, Regional, and Neighborhood Science
abstract: |
  Understanding neighborhood context is critical for social science research, public
  policy analysis, and urban planning. The social meaning, formal definition, and formal
  operationalization of "neighborhood" depends on the study or application, however, so
  neighborhood analysis and modeling requires both flexibility and adherence to a formal

>   pipeline. Maintaining that balance is challenging for a variety of reasons. To address

Reviewer 4: The interrupted parallel here was difficult for me to follow. Consider breaking up into two phrases or reorder something like "However, the term 'neighborhood' differs in definition, connotation, and practical use depending on study or application, so neighborhood analysis and modeling requires both flexibility and adherence to a formal pipeline."

  those challenges, `geosnap`, the Geospatial Neighborhood Analysis Package provides a
  suite of tools for exploring, modeling, and visualizing the social context and spatial
  extent of neighborhoods and regions over time. It brings together state-of-the-art
  techniques from geodemographics, regionalization, spatial data science, and
  segregation analysis to support social science research, public policy analysis, and
  urban planning. It provides a simple interface tailored to formal analysis of
  spatiotemporal urban data.

---

## Introduction

Quantitative research focusing on cities, neighborhoods, and regions is in high
demand. On the practical side, city planners, Non-Governmental Organizations
(NGOs), and commercial businesses all have increasing access to georeferenced
datasets and spatial analyses can turn these data into more efficient,
equitable, and profitable, decision-making [@cortes2020OpensourceFramework;
@finio2022SmartGrowth; @Kang2021; @Knaap2017; @knaap2023SegregatedDesign;

> @Rey2022a; @wei2022ReducingRacial]. On the scientific/academic side, many of the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
@Rey2022a; @wei2022ReducingRacial]. On the academic side, many of the
```
Slash is unnecessary.

era's pressing problems are spatial or urban in form (e.g. the housing
affordability crisis, climate change, economic transformation, globalization,
and continuing processes of segregation and gentrification), thus requiring
bespoke statistical methods and simulation techniques to produce accurate

> inferences. Thus, while data science teams in industries across the planet race

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
era's pressing problems are spatial or urban in form, requiring
bespoke statistical methods and simulation techniques to produce accurate
inferences. Thus, while data science teams in industries across the planet race
```
1. Example of distracting and extending parenthetical phrase. Consider a footnote with citations or a separate sentence altogether.
1. This particular claim representing the body of academia is also un-cited. Compare to the citations of "practical" section above.
1.  "thus [...]. Thus,"

> to conquer 'geospatial data science' few practitioners have expertise in the

Reviewer 4: Example 
```suggestion
to conquer geospatial data science few practitioners have expertise in the
```
Example of inconsistent emphasis. Is this an internal definition or a reference? Without knowing, it serves as "scare quotes" emphasis in my mind's voice, which I find distracting.

appropriate data sources, modeling frameworks, or data management techniques
necessary for wrangling and synthesizing urban data.

To address these challenges we introduce `geosnap`, the geospatial neighborhood analysis
package, which is a unique Python package sitting at the intersection of spatial science
and practical application. In doing so, it provides a bridge between formal spatial

> analysis/spatial econometrics and the applied fields of neighborhood change, access to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
analysis and the applied fields of neighborhood change, access to
```
Is the slash and extra term necessary? If the terms are specific and both necessary to include, please define and contrast the terms ahead of this, then remove the slash and include both in the bridge metaphor.

opportunity, and the social determinants of health. The package provides extremely fast
and efficient access to hundreds of socioeconomic, infrastructure, and environmental
quality indicators that allow researchers to move from zero data to an informative model
in a few short lines of code. 

> It is organized into layers for data acquisition, analysis, and visualization, and 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`geosnap` is organized into layers for data acquisition, analysis, and visualization, and 
```
Or similar. New paragraph and unclear continuation from previous phrasing.

includes tools for harmonizing disparate datasets into consistent geographic boundaries,

> creating "geodemographic typologies" that summarize and predict multidimensional
> segregation over time, and network analysis tools that generate rapid (locally
> computed) service areas and travel isochrones. We expect the tool will be immediately

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
creating geodemographic typologies that summarize and predict multidimensional
segregation over time, and network analysis tools that locally compute rapid service areas and travel isochrones. We expect the tool will be immediately
```
This is representative of my main style feedback above:
1. Distracting emphasis. If the "geodemographic typologies" is important, consider explicitly defining it. Italics could do if needed, or use MyST Terms.
1. I know you address in more detail in alter sections, but this section was particularly jargony on my first read.
1. Parenthetical phrase.

useful for any analyst studying urban areas.

## The Geospatial Neighborhood Analysis Package (geosnap)

`geosnap` provides a suite of tools for exploring, modeling, and visualizing the social
context and spatial extent of neighborhoods and regions over time. It brings together
state-of-the-art techniques from geodemographics, regionalization, spatial data science,
and segregation measurement to support social science research, public policy analysis, and
urban planning. It provides a simple interface tailored to formal analysis of
spatiotemporal urban data, and its primary features include

> - Quick access to a large database of commonly-used neighborhood indicators from

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Quick access to a large database of commonly used neighborhood indicators from
```

  U.S. providers including the U.S. Census, the Environmental Protection Agency
  (EPA), Longitudinal Household-Employment Dynamics (LEHD), the National Center
  for Education Statistics (NCES), and National Land Cover Database (NLCD),

>   streamed efficiently from the cloud (or stored for repeated use).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  U.S. providers including the U.S. Census, the Environmental Protection Agency
  (EPA), Longitudinal Household-Employment Dynamics (LEHD), the National Center
  for Education Statistics (NCES), and National Land Cover Database (NLCD),
  streamed efficiently from the cloud or stored for repeated use.
```
1. Thanks for defining these acronyms. Consider using MyST acronyms for further clarity when published!
1. Parenthesis.

- Fast, efficient tooling for standardizing data from multiple time periods into a
  shared geographic representation appropriate for spatiotemporal analysis
- Analytical methods for understanding sociospatial structure in neighborhoods, cities,
  and regions, using unsupervised ML from scikit-learn and spatial optimization from

>   PySAL

Reviewer 4: Add links or references for scikit-learn and PySAL

- Novel techniques for understanding the evolution of neighborhoods over time, including
  identifying hotspots of local neighborhood change, as well as modeling and simulating
  neighborhood conditions into the future
- Unique tools for measuring segregation dynamics over space and time
- Bespoke visualization methods for understanding travel commute-sheds, business
  service-areas, and neighborhood change over time

The package is organized into four layers providing different aspects of functionality,
namely `io` for data ingestion and storage, `analyze` for analysis and modeling
functions, `harmonize` for geographic boundary harmonization, and `viz` for
visualization.

```python
import geopandas as gpd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import pandas as pd
from geosnap import DataStore
from geosnap import analyze as gaz
from geosnap import io as gio
from geosnap import visualize as gvz
from geosnap.harmonize import harmonize
```

### Data

Neighborhoods, cities, and regions are characterized by a variety of data, and
to understand how places change over time, or how they affect the people who
live there, researchers often require information on the social, environmental,

> institutional, and economic conditions that characterize the area. The geosnap

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Neighborhoods, cities, and regions can be characterized by a variety of data. Researchers use the social, environmental,
institutional, and economic conditions of the area to understand change in these places and the people who inhabit them. The geosnap
```

Run-on and repeat of "characterize[d]". Suggestion is just one option!

package tries to make the process of collecting and wrangling these various

> publicly-available datasets simpler, faster, and more reproducible by

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
publicly available datasets simpler, faster, and more reproducible by
```
As with above, modifying adverbs directly preceding adjectives shouldn't need this unless ambiguous.

repackaging the most commonly used into modern formats and serving (those we are
allowed to) over fast web protocols. This makes it much faster to conduct,
iterate, and share analyses for better urban research and public policy than the
typical method of gathering repeated datasets from disparate providers in old
formats. Of course, these datasets are generally just a starting place, designed
to be used alongside additional information unique to each study region.

Toward that end, many of the datasets used in social science and public policy research
in the U.S. are drawn from the same set of resources, like the Census, the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), or the National Center
for Education Statistics (NCES), to name a few. As researchers, we found ourselves
writing the same code to download [versions of] the same data repeatedly (at different

> scales or time frames). That works ok in some cases, but it is also cumbersome, and can

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
writing the same code to download  the same data repeatedly. That works in some cases, but it is also cumbersome, and can
```
1. Or include important pieces inline if needed. In my opinion the impact and clarity goes up when they're completely removed. I'll highlight some of them from here on and leave the specific solution to you.
1. "ok" is a vague quantity.

be extremely slow for even medium-sized datasets. While there are nice tools like
[cenpy](https://github.com/cenpy-devs/cenpy) or

> [pyrgris](https://walker-data.com/pygris/), these tools cannot overcome a basic
> limitation of many government data providers, namely that they use old technology, e.g.,
> File Transfer Protocol (FTP) and outdated file formats (like shapefiles).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[pyrgris](https://walker-data.com/pygris/), but creating fast, scalable analyses with these tools is potentially limited by the data transfer protocols and file formats relied on by many government data providers [citation or further clarification].
```
1. Elaborate and support this claim in a way that connects to impact. Would it matter that FTP and shapefiles are old if they worked well to solve our problems?

Author: elaborated in the text

Thus, rather than repetitively querying these slow servers, geosnap takes the
position that it is preferable to store repeatedly-used datasets in
[highly-performant formats](https://github.com/opengeospatial/geoparquet),
because they are usually small and fast enough to store on disk. When not on
disk, it makes sense to stream these datasets over
[S3]((https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)), where they can be read very quickly (and
directly). For that reason, geosnap maintains

> [a public S3 bucket](https://open.quiltdata.com/b/spatial-ucr), thanks to the

Reviewer 4: Very cool!

[Amazon Open Data Registry](https://github.com/awslabs/open-data-registry), and
uses [quilt](https://www.quiltdata.com/) to manage data under the hood. A
national-level dataset of more than 200 Census variables at the blockgroup scale
(n=220333), *including geometries* can be downloaded in under two minutes,
requires only 921MB of disk space, and can be read into GeoPandas in under four
seconds. A comparable dataset stored on the Census servers takes more than an
hour to download from the Census FTP servers in compressed format, requires more
than 15GB of uncompressed disk space, and is read into a GeoDataFrame in 6.48
seconds, including only the geometries.

The `DataStore` class is a quick way to access a large database of social, economic, and
environmental variables tabulated at various geographic levels. These data are not
required to use the package, and `geosnap` is capable of conducting analysis anywhere in
the globe, but these datasets are used so commonly in U.S.-centric research that

> geosnap's developers maintain this database as an additional layer.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the developers of `geosnap` maintain this database as an additional layer.
```
Or standardize without backticks. Either way, I suppose!

```python
datasets = DataStore()
```

#### Demographics

Over the last decade, one of the most useful resources for understanding socioeconomic
changes in U.S. neighborhoods over time has been the
[Longitudinal Tract Database (LTDB)](https://s4.ad.brown.edu/Projects/Diversity/researcher/bridging.htm),

> which is used in countless studies of neighborhood change [@Logan_2014]. One of the most

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
which is used in studies of neighborhood change [@Logan_2014]. One of the most
```
Snark incoming: I count one (1) 😂. I kid, but the word is unnecessary!

Author: +100 :)

> recognized benefits of this dataset is that it standardizes boundaries for census

Reviewer 4: Is this recognition possible to be quantified and cited? As a maintainer myself, I understand if it's not easy or possible to quantify.

geographic units over time, providing a consistent set of units for time-series

> analysis. An under-appreciated benefit of these data is the ease with which researchers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
analysis. A benefit of these data is the ease with which researchers
```
"under-appreciated" verges on needing citation here, but could stay as well.

have access to hundreds of useful intermediate variables computed from raw Census data
(e.g. population rates by race and age). Unfortunately, the LTDB data is only available
for a subset of Census releases (and only at the tract level), so geosnap includes
tooling that computes the same variable set as LTDB, and it provides access to those
data for every release of the 5-year ACS at both the tract and blockgroup levels
(variable permitting). Note: following the Census convention, the 5-year releases are
labelled by the terminal year.

Unlike LTDB or The National Historical Geographic Information System
[NHGIS](https://www.nhgis.org/), these datasets are created using code that collects raw
data from the Census FTP servers, computes intermediate variables according to the
codebook, and saves the original geometries-- and is

> **[fully open and reproducible](https://github.com/oturns/geosnap/blob/main/tools/process_census_gdb.ipynb)**.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Unlike LTDB or the National Historical Geographic Information System
([NHGIS](https://www.nhgis.org/)), these datasets are created using code that collects raw
data from the Census FTP servers, computes intermediate variables according to the
codebook, and saves the original geometries-- and is
[fully open and reproducible](https://github.com/oturns/geosnap/blob/main/tools/process_census_gdb.ipynb).
```
1. What is "the codebook" here?
1. Inconsistent emphasis.
1. What is "fully open and reproducible" here? The "code that collects raw data"? The phrase after the dash appears fragmented on first read, consider breaking up or reordering.

This means that all assumptions are exposed, and the full data processing pipeline is
visible to any user or contributor to review, update, or send corrections. Geosnap's
approach to data provenance reflects our view that open and transparent analysis is
always preferable to black boxes, and is a much better way to promote scientific
discovery. Further, by formalizing the pipeline using code, the tooling is re-run to
generate new datasets each time ACS or decennial Census data is released.

To load a dataset, like the 2010 tract-level census data, just call it as a method,
which returns a geodataframe (some datasets, like blocks or `acs` have additional

> arguments). Geometries are available for all of the commonly used administrative units,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To load a dataset, e.g. 2010 tract-level census data, call it as a method to return a geodataframe. Geometries are available for all of the commonly used administrative units,
```
Here is where the aside "e.g." phrase could add clarity. Then the parenthesis.

many of which have multiple time periods available:

> - metropolitan statistical areas (MSAS)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs)
```

- states
- counties
- tracts
- blockgroups
- blocks

Datasets can be queried and subset using an appropriate Federal Information Processing
Series
[(FIPS) Code](https://www.census.gov/library/reference/code-lists/ansi.html),

> which uniquely identifies every federally-defined geographic unit in the U.S.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
which uniquely identifies every federally defined geographic unit in the U.S.
```

```python
# blockgroups in San Diego county from the 2014-2018 American Community Survey
# (San Diego county FIPS is 06073)
sd = gio.get_acs(datasets, year=2018, county_fips=['06073'])
```

There is also a table that maps counties to their constituent MSAs. Note that
blockgroups are not exposed directly, but are accessible as part of the ACS and EJSCREEN
data. If the dataset exists in the `DataStore` path, it will be loaded from disk,

> otherwise it will be streamed from S3 (provided an internet connection is available).
> The geosnap `io` module (aliased here as `gio`) has a set of functions for creating

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
otherwise it will be streamed from S3 with an available internet connection.
The geosnap `io` module (aliased here as `gio`) has a set of functions for creating
```
The second one here could be offset with commas, but this is fine enough.

datasets for different geographic regions and different time scales, as well as
functions that store remote datasets to disk for repeated use.

#### Environment

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)'s
[envrironmental justice screening tool (EJSCREEN)](https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen) is a
national dataset that provides a wealth of environmental (and some demographic) data at
a blockgroup level. For a
[full list of indicators](https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen/overview-environmental-indicators-ejscreen)

> and their metadata, see the EPA page, but this dataset includes important variables like

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
full list of indicators
and their metadata, see [this EPA page](https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen/overview-environmental-indicators-ejscreen). This dataset includes important variables like
```

Descriptive and direct links are most helpful for screen readers and other assistive tech. These sentences are also conceptually different and worth separating.

air toxics cancer risk, ozone concentration in the air, particulate matter, and proximity
to superfund sites.

#### Education

Geosnap provides access to two related educational data sources. The National Center for
Education Statistics
[(NCES)](https://nces.ed.gov/programs/edge/Geographic/DistrictBoundaries) provides
geographic data for schools, school districts and (some time periods) of school
attendance boundaries. The
[Stanford Education Data Archive](https://exhibits.stanford.edu/data/catalog/db586ns4974) (SEDA)
is a collection of standardized achievement data, available at multiple levels (from
state to district to school) with nearly complete national coverage. These data were
released by researchers at Stanford to "help us—scholars, policymakers, educators,
parents—learn how to improve educational opportunity for all children," and are an

> incredible resource for social science research.For more information on how to use the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
incredible resource for social science research. For more information on how to use the
```

SEDA data, see their website, or the
[Educational Opportunity Project](https://edopportunity.org/). These can be combined
quickly to visualize or conduct further spatial analyses of educational achievement at
multiple geographic scales.

#### Employment

The LEHD Origin-Destination Employment Statistics (LODES) data contain job
counts tabulated for home and workplace census block, and broken down by
industrial sector, and a handful of demographic characteristics like race and

> education. LODES also provides flow matrices that show the origin and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The LEHD Origin-Destination Employment Statistics (LODES) data contain job
counts tabulated for home and workplace census block. These data are broken down by
industrial sector and a handful of demographic characteristics like race and
education. LODES also provides flow matrices that show the origin and
```
These phrases are a bit disjointed.

destination blockgroups, and the number of commuters who travel between the two.

### Harmonization

> A common issue in spatial analysis is that geographic tabulation units can (and
> often do) change over time. For instance the U.S. census boundary polygons like
> tracts and blocks are re-drawn with each census to accomodate population growth

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A common issue in spatial analysis is that geographic tabulation units can change over time. For instance the U.S. census boundary polygons like
tracts and blocks are re-drawn with each census to accomodate population growth
```

Also, I'm unfamiliar: should "census" be consistently capitalized, or not? Or does it depend, a la "Earth" and "the earth"?

Author: the latter. "a census" is different from the Census (shorthand for the Census Bureau)

and change. That means it's impossible to see if a given tract has changed over
time because the label assigned to each tract means something different in each

> time period. To help solve that problem geosnap leverages the pysal

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
time period. To help solve that problem `geosnap` leverages the PySAL
```

[`tobler`](https://pysal.org/tobler) package to harmonize spatial boundaries

> over time. Doing so is as simple as calling the `harmonize()` function.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
over time. We do so by calling the `harmonize()` function.
```

polygons. This approach assumes each polygon has constant density of each attribute so
its most useful when the polygons are small and homogenous.

When harmonizing boundaries over time, we need to distinguish between
[intensive and extensive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intensive_and_extensive_properties)
variables because each needs to be handled differently during the interpolation
process. An "extensive variable" is one whose "magnitude is additive for
subsystems", where 'the system' this context, refers to the collection of
geographic units (which serve as statistical sampling units), and each
'subsystem' is a single geographic unit. Thus, 'geographically-extensive'
attributes include those such as population counts, land area, or crop yield,
and 'geographically-intensive' variables typically include ratio or interval
functions of extensive variables, e.g. density (total population *per unit of
land*), average income (total income *per person*), or the share of a particular
population subcategory (total population in category *per unit of population*).
Median income is a statistic (so intensive), whereas total population is a count

> (extensive), so we make sure to pass each to the appropriate list.

Reviewer 4: I appreciate the new explanations a ton!

Please see the [rendered preview](https://proceedings.scipy.org/previews/01914d45-e7a0-7684-8015-d2300078cdac?preview=eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJpc3MiOiJodHRwczovL2pvdXJuYWxzLmN1cnZlbm90ZS5jb20iLCJleHAiOjE3MjQ1Mjc5MzUsImF1ZCI6InNjaXB5Iiwic2NvcGUiOiJzdWJtaXNzaW9uIiwic2NvcGVJZCI6IjAxOGZkZWNhLTQzMmUtN2FhYS1iMjRjLTExYmU1MTRmZjg3NSIsImlhdCI6MTcyNDA5NTkzNX0.SpWh5qh-WvhBL2aRRxVMIMBe3hm-hn24GEAGt27v-IU#harmonization). The mixing of emphasis (double quotes, single quotes, and italics are all used here) with unclear purpose or reference and the interruption from parentheses and example phrases have totally confused me here. Though, I do appreciate the contrasting "per <quantity>" phrases, they're difficult for me to parse inline when reading. Please heavily consider revising this fully for clarity and impact.

I'm also glad to step away from this point with input from others if this is more of a Me Problem.

)
plt.tight_layout()
```

![Census Data with Harmonized Boundaries](harmonize.png)

#### Harmonizing to an Alternative Polygon

In some cases, it can be useful to discard the original boundaries altogether and
instead harmonize all time periods to a consistent geographic unit defined elsewhere
(like a school district, or congressional district, or a regular hexgrid).

```python
from tobler.util import h3fy
sd_hex = h3fy(sd[sd.year == 2010], resolution=7)
sd_hex_interp = harmonize(
    sd, target_gdf=sd_hex, intensive_variables=["median_contract_rent"]
)
gvz.plot_timeseries(
    sd_hex_interp,
    "median_contract_rent",
    title="Median Rent, Regular Hexgrid",
    dpi=200,
    cmap="Greens",
    figsize=(12, 10),
    nrows=2,
    ncols=2,
)
plt.tight_layout()

```

![Census Boundaries Harmonized to a Hexgrid](harmonize_hexgrid.png)

After the harmonization process, each polygon represents a distinct portion of the study
area whose boundaries are unchanging, and can be conceived as a discrete unit in
temporal analyses. That is, unlike the original decennial census data whose polygons are
different in each time period, the harmonized data can be used directly in studies of

> neighborhood change, for example those using Markov-based methods [@Agovino2019; @gallo_space-time_2004-1; @kang_rey_2018_ars; @rey_2016_jgs; @Rey2014] or
> sequence-analysis methods [@Kang2021; @Lee2017] (both of which are built into `geosnap`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
neighborhood change. For example, both Markov-based methods [@Agovino2019; @gallo_space-time_2004-1; @kang_rey_2018_ars; @rey_2016_jgs; @Rey2014] and
sequence-analysis methods [@Kang2021; @Lee2017] are built into `geosnap`.
```
An example to drop the parentheses.

### Analysis

#### Geodemographic Clustering & Regionalization

[Geodemographic analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geodemographic_segmentation),
which includes the application of unsupervised learning algorithms to demographic and
socioeconomic data, is a widely-used technique that falls under the broad umbrella of

> "spatial data science"
> [@Abbas2009; @Adnan2010; @anderson2010UsingGeodemographics; @DeSabbata2019; @singleton2009CreatingOpen; @singleton2009GeodemographicsVisualisation].
> Technically there is no formal *spatial analysis* in traditional geodemographics,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
spatial data science
[@Abbas2009; @Adnan2010; @anderson2010UsingGeodemographics; @DeSabbata2019; @singleton2009CreatingOpen; @singleton2009GeodemographicsVisualisation].
Technically there is no formal spatial analysis in traditional geodemographics,
```
Emphases edited.

What are the references supporting here? Please describe their inclusion in more detail or pull explicit citations from specific references.

however given its emphasis on geographic units of analysis (and subsequent mapping of
the results) it is often viewed as a first (if not requisite step) in exploratory
analyses of a particular study area.

The intellectual roots of geodemographics extend from analytical sociology and classic
studies from Factorial Ecology
[@Berry1971; @Hunter1972; @lebowitz1977CriticalExamination; @Perle1979; @Rees1969] and

> Social Area Analysis

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
studies from factorial ecology
[@Berry1971; @Hunter1972; @lebowitz1977CriticalExamination; @Perle1979; @Rees1969] and
social area analysis
```
These appeared not capitalized in the linked references.

[@Bell1962; @Brindley1979; @green1971SocialArea; @Shevky1955; @Spielman2008]. Today,

> geodemographic analysis is routinely applied in academic studies of neighborhood
> segregation and neighborhood change, and used extremely frequently in industry,
> particularly marketing where products like
> [tapestry](https://www.esri.com/en-us/arcgis/products/data/data-portfolio/tapestry-segmentation)
> and
> [mosaic](https://www.experian.com/small-business/geodemographic-segmentation-mailing-lists)
> are sold for their predictive power. Whereas social scientists often look at the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
geodemographic analysis can be applied in academic studies of neighborhood
segregation and neighborhood change, and can be used in industry,
particularly marketing where products like
[tapestry](https://www.esri.com/en-us/arcgis/products/data/data-portfolio/tapestry-segmentation)
and
[mosaic](https://www.experian.com/small-business/geodemographic-segmentation-mailing-lists)
are sold for their predictive power. Whereas social scientists often look at the
```
These claims could use citations or simplified language, though I appreciate the links to industry competitors!

resulting map of neighborhood types and ask how these patterns came to be, practitioners
often look at the map and ask how they can use the patterns to inform better strategic

> decisions.

Reviewer 4: This feels like a strong distinction to draw without example or justification.

In urban social science, a primary goal is often to study the social composition
of neighborhoods in a region (e.g. the racial and ethnic makeup, the
population's age distribution and fertility rates, or the socioeconomic
disparities or commercial and industrial mix, to name only a few), and
understand whether they have changed over time (and where) and whether these
neighborhood types are consistent over time and across places. That requires a
common pipeline of collecting the same variable sets, standardizing them (often
within the same time period, so they can be pooled with other time periods) then
clustering the entire long-form dataset followed by further analysis and
visualization of the results. Most often, this process happens repeatedly using
different combinations of variables or different algorithms or cluster outputs
(and in different places at different times). Geosnap provides a set of tools to
simplify this pipeline making it trivial to construct, interrogate, and
visualize a large swath of models (e.g. using different subsets of variables)

> for rapid exploration.

Reviewer 4: In 4 sentences here you feature 5 parenthetical phrases. This highlights my overall consideration to edit for clarity and simplicity!

From here I will stop highlighting them, but there are more above and below. Please evaluate their impact on readability and consider using them sparingly and where most impactful.

> To create a simple geodemographic typology, use the `cluster` function from

Reviewer 4: What is a geodemographic typology?

geosnap's `analyze` module and pass a geodataframe, a set of columns to include
in the cluster analysis, the algorithm to use and the number of clusters to fit
(though some algorithms require different arguments and/or discover the number

> of clusters endogenously. By default, this will z-standardize all the input

Reviewer 4: "endogenously" is unclear, or this process could be elaborated on. Also, last actual comment on parentheses here: this one remained unclosed! Consider editing as above.

Each of the inset boxes shows a different variable, with cluster assignments on
the x-axis, and the variable itself on the y-axis The boxplot in the center
shows the median and inter-quartile range (IQR), and the “body” of the “violin”
is a kernel-density estimate reflected across the x-axis. In short, the fat
parts of the violin show where the bulk of the observations are located, and the
skinny “necks” show the long tails.

```python
gvz.plot_violins_by_cluster(atl_kmeans, columns, cluster_col="kmeans")
```

![Violin Plots](violins.png)

Regionalization is a similar exercise that attempts to define groups of homogenous
tracts, but also enforces a contiguity constraint so that similar geographic units must
also be proximate to one another. As with geodemographic clustering, when carrying out a
regionalization exercise, we are searching for groups of observations (census tracts in
this case) which are similar in socioeconomic and demographic composition. If the goal
of geodemographics is to identify neighborhood *types*, that could exist anywhere in the
region, the goal of regionalization is to identify *specific neighborhoods* that exist

> at a distinct place in the region.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
this case) which are similar in socioeconomic and demographic composition. If the goal
of geodemographics is to identify neighborhood *types* that could exist anywhere in the
region, the goal of regionalization is to identify *specific neighborhoods* that exist
at a distinct place in the region.
```
The italics could stay useful here for contrast.

Following that concept, we can use constrained clustering to develop an

> empirical version of geographically-bounded neighborhoods, where the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
empirical version of geographically bounded neighborhoods, where the
```

neighborhoods are defined by internal social homogeneity. This is similar to the
historic and well-defined neighborhood zones in places like Chicago and
Pittsburgh. Similar to the cluster analysis above, the following cell creates a
regionalization solution, grouping observations in Los Angeles into categories
that are both socially and spatially distinct using a spatially-constrained
hierarchical clustering algorithm (with Ward's linkage).

```python
la = gio.get_acs(datasets, county_fips="06037", years=2021, level="tract")
la_ward_reg, la_ward_model = gaz.regionalize(
    gdf=la,
    method="ward_spatial",
    n_clusters=25,
    columns=columns,
    return_model=True,
    spatial_weights="queen",
)
la_ward_reg[columns + ["geometry", "ward_spatial"]].explore(
    "ward_spatial", categorical=True, cmap="Accent", tiles="CartoDB Positron"
)
```

![Geodemographic Regions in Los Angeles](la_regions.png)

#### Transitional Dynamics

With geosnap, it’s possible to look at temporal geodemographics without writing

> much code. Under the hood, the package provides tools for scaling each dataset

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
much code. The package provides tools for scaling each dataset
```
I assume this is functionality exposed to the user and not hidden "under the hood"?

within its own time period, adjusting currency values for inflation, and
ensuring that times, variables, and geometries stay aligned properly. Together
those tools make it easy to explore how different portions of the region
transition into different neighborhood types over time, and if desired, model

> the evolution of neighborhood change as a spatial Markov process. The following

Reviewer 4: a link or definition for spatial Markov process would be useful

> cell creates a neighborhood typology in Chicago using four mutually-exclusive

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
cell creates a neighborhood typology in Chicago using four mutually exclusive
```

home values and household incomes, which yields a set of cluster labels that
change over time for each geographic unit. The `plot_timeseries` function
arranges the maps of neighborhood category labels in sequential order.

```python
columns = ['median_household_income', 'median_home_value', 'p_asian_persons', 'p_hispanic_persons', 'p_nonhisp_black_persons', 'p_nonhisp_white_persons']
chicago_ward = cluster(gdf=chicago, columns=columns, method='ward', n_clusters=5)
plot_timeseries(chicago_ward, 'ward', categorical=True, nrows=2, ncols=2, figsize=(12,16))
plt.tight_layout()
```

![Geodemographic Neighborhood Types in Chicago](transition_maps.png)

In this example, the vast majority of tracts are assigned to the same geodemographic
type in each time period, but some transition into different types over time. The ones
that do transition tend to be those on the edges of large contiguous groups (i.e. change
tends to happen along the periphery and move inward, implying a certain kind of spatial
dynamic). Following, we can also use the sequence of labels to create a spatial Markov
transition model. These models examine how often one neighborhood type transitions into

> another type–then how these transition rates change under different conditions of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
another type, then how these transition rates change under different conditions of
```

#### Travel Isochrones

As a package focused on "neighborhoods", much of the functionality in geosnap is
organized around the concept of 'endogenous' neighborhoods. That is, it takes a
classical perspective on neighborhood formation: a "neighborhood" is defined loosely by
its social composition, and the dynamics of residential mobility mean that these
neighborhoods can grow, shrink, or transition entirely.

But two alternative concepts of "neighborhood" are also worth considering. The first,
posited by social scientists, is that each person or household can be conceptualized as
residing in *its own* neighborhood which extends outward from the person's household
until some threshold distance. This neighborhood represents the boundary inside which we
might expect some social interaction to occur with one's "neighbors". The second is a
normative concept advocated by architects, urban designers, and planners (arguably still
the goal for [new urbanists](http://www.newurbanism.org)): that a neighborhood is
[a discrete pocket of infrastructure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neighbourhood_unit)
organized as a small, self-contained economic unit. A common shorthand today is the "20

> minute neighborhood" [@Calafiore2022]. 

Reviewer 4: I'm highlighting this paragraph and the resolved reviews as an illustration to my overall review point regarding emphasis. Inconsistent use of "double quotes", 'single quotes', _italics_, and **bold text** has lead to confusion for me. I'm not sure what here is a reference to specific language or definitions, what is emphasis, and what is internal definitions from the author.

Consider avoiding quotes (single or double) for implication or emphasis, and reserve them for direct citations from references. Italics could be used sparingly for clear internal definitions or the occasional emphasis. Please review the entire document for their use once standard formatting is chosen.

![The 20-Minute Neighborhood Concept via [wikipedia](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/e/e3/New_York_Regional_Survey%2C_Vol_7.jpg?20170410025533)](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/e/e3/New_York_Regional_Survey%2C_Vol_7.jpg?20170410025533)

The difference between these two perspectives is what defines the origin of the
neighborhood (the "town center" or the person's home), and whether "neighborhood" is
universal to all neighbors or unique for each resident. Both of them rely abstractly on
the concept of an isochrone: the set of destinations accessible within a specified
travel budget. Defining an isochrone is a network routing problem, but its spatial
representation is usually depicted as a polygon that encloses the set of reachable
locations. That polygon is also sometimes called a walk-shed (or bike/transit/commute
etc. "shed", depending on the particular mode of travel). For the person at the center
of the isochrone, whose "neighborhood" the isochrone represents, the polygon is

> sometimes conceived as an "egohood" or "bespoke neighborhood"

Reviewer 4: Highlighting to show the distinction from before: "neighborhood" and previous quotes are not citations from the following references, but "egohood" etc. are, and the distinction is valuable to me the reader!

Protection Agency (EPA), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), or the National Center
for Education Statistics (NCES), to name a few. As researchers, we found ourselves
writing the same code to download  the same data repeatedly. That works in some cases, but it is also cumbersome, and can
be extremely slow for even medium-sized datasets (tables with roughly 75 thousand rows and 400 columns representing Census Tracts in the USA can take several hours or even days to download from Census servers). While there are nice tools like
[cenpy](https://github.com/cenpy-devs/cenpy) or
[pyrgris](https://walker-data.com/pygris/), these tools cannot overcome a basic
limitation of many government data providers, namely that they use old technology, e.g.,
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) and outdated file formats (like shapefiles).

Thus, rather than repetitively querying these slow servers, geosnap takes the
position that it is preferable to store repeatedly-used datasets in
[highly-performant formats](https://github.com/opengeospatial/geoparquet),
because they are usually small and fast enough to store on disk. When not on
disk, it makes sense to stream these datasets over

> [S3]((https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)), where they can be read very quickly (and

Reviewer 3: @knaaptime - I believe these extra parentheses are causing link resolution to fail. See if this change allows the tests to pass. (For what it's worth, the preview build is still updating correctly, only the content checks are failing.)

```suggestion
[S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), where they can be read very quickly (and
```
